I want to talk about,
um,
some interesting observations because Gary,
you like to talk about,
um,
you know,
what's going on in different dietary trends in different cultures.
And I find that pretty interesting too.
I want to talk about the fact that sugar intake in the United States has been
declining for the last 20 years.
So it peaked in 1999 and it is currently,
depending on which source of evidence you believe,
15 to 23% lower than it was in 1999.
This has been corroborated by a number of different sources of evidence is
number 17 on my blog.
And of course we know that obesity has increased.
Diabetes has increased substantially over the last 20 years in the percentage of
the population are actually correct percentage.
Yeah.
And uh,
and UK sugar intake has been declining for 50 years.
I don't believe that.
Okay,
well,
you can argue with the data there.
A number 17 on my blog,
there are about 22% lower and this is what we see across a number of different,
uh,
industrialized countries.
You see a stagnation or decline in sugar intake in recent decades as obesity
rates are continuing to increase.
Um,
and of course that 50 year period that covers the decline in the UK covers the
entire UK obesity and diabetes epidemics.
Um,
but there's another one I want to talk about that and I respond to that.
Yeah,
we should probably respond to that.
Stefan,
actually,
I'll let you respond for me because we had this debate with the Keto Foundation.
So you know,
my art counterargument.
Do you want to give it?
Yeah,
sure.
Absolutely.
I mean,
are you sure you want to let me give it though?
Am I correct that?
Okay.
All right.
So your counterargument is that the amount of sugar that we consumed 20 years
ago,
or even maybe 50 years ago,
maybe continuing to fatten us today,
and it's about the sugar that we used to eat 20 or 50 years ago and not
necessarily about the sugar we eat today.
Well,
it's not exactly right.
Okay.
I get it.
So the argument I made was because he brought this up when we've had to do a
written debate on the Keto Foundation website,
and it's interesting if you think about use tobaccos and example.
So tobacco smoking per capita smoking in America peaked in 1965 right up to the
surgeon general's report and it took 30 years before lung cancer rates turned
over.
Okay.
And I think we both agree that cigarettes are a major cause of lung cancer
smoking.
So what you basically have as a system in which,
if there are any,
there's the assumption that Stephanie is making when he quotes it was kind of
data,
is that the relationship between sugar and obesity is linear.
So it's sugar goes up,
obesity and diabetes goes up and if sugar turns over they don't.
So here's the thought experiment I used in Keto,
which is
1965 were smoking per capita about 20 cigarettes a day.
As it starts to come down,
imagine we only cut that to 17 cigarettes or 16 cigarettes,
a 20% reduction in smoking.
Would you expect to see a reduction in the lung cancer rates?
Again,
this is the point I made about what you would expect to see rather than new
things.
Simplistic a metaphor.
So the question is,
would you like Joe,
we go from 20 to 16.
Do you expect to see the lung cancer rates turnover?
No.
And in sugar we went from drop a know you might,
the derivative might drop.
You might expect it to slow a tiny bit.
Still use it's,
there was a bunch of weird comparison because one of them has poisoned the other
one's food.
Right?
Well,
but then this case,
the food,
the question is to how toxic is the food?
So in sugar we have a variety in sugar.
What happens is the equivalent of going from 20 cigarettes to 16 beginning in
1999 and Stephanie is saying,
I would expect to see an immediate change in obese.
And in fact,
if you actually look at the rates,
the,
the rate of increase in the prevalence appeared to plateau around six or seven
years later.
Uh,
who knows whether that's relevant to get days small decrease in sugar,
20 pay,
even if it's 20%,
that's 20 to 16 cigarettes.
And I'm Sandi,
the other factor that I talk about my book and stuff in those,
this is very clearly have maternal transmission of the propensity to obesity and
diabetes.
So there's a generational effect.
This,
and this is studies that were done in the same,
on the same Pima,
the same native American tribe or each generation if gets more and more,
uh,
susceptible to whatever it is in the Diet that's triggering and obesity and
diabetes.
So that's been happening in the United States and around the world.
You've got a generational effect that could last far longer,
might even keep going indefinitely,
even if it's sugar levels drop.
So you have the sugar quit kicking off the obesity epidemic.
And yet Stephen's about to say this as a story and it is a story,
but it's clearly the case that mothers who are obese during pregnancy or
diabetic or gestationally diabetic,
they become diabetic during pregnancy or they have metabolic syndrome,
they're just uh,
insulin resistant or they gain a lot of weight in pregnancy,
will give birth to children who are at higher risk of becoming an obese and
diabetic when they get older and in younger ages and those children will pass it
on.
So again,
we have,
you know,
I would be nice,
I would love it if sugar consumption came down and with it,
um,
obesity and diabetes plummeted,
but it's not a,
in any way a refutation of this hypothesis,
which I just want to state what it is because people get confused about and we
never got to it.
There's sugar hypothesis is a little different than what we've been talking
about and it's pretty simple.
We have obesity and diabetes epidemics worldwide,
as we talked with,
doesn't matter the genetics of the population,
you add something about a western diet to those populations,
western Diet and lifestyle,
you get these explosions,
epidemics of obesity and diabetes.
And what I'm hypothesizing in this book is that sugar is a,
something that has to be added.
Maybe it's sugary beverages for all I know,
maybe or it could be,
you know,
a more complex hypothesis,
succinct as possible.
One is you add sugar to any population to tie it in sufficient,
whether it's southeast Asians living on Rice or the annual living on reindeer
and whatever,
or the native Americans to the great plains or you know,
Caucasians living in the upper east side,
Manhattan,
add enough sugar and eventually through the metabolic effects of the sugar and
the generational effects,
you will get explosions of obesity and diabetes and metabolic seven.
You want to respond to that?
Sure.
I mean,
Gary,
you called it man.
Um,
it's always possible to tell a story to salvage your hypothesis would,
that doesn't necessarily make the story correct.
I mean,
I can come up with a story that cosmic rays cause obesity by hitting my fat
cells and making them fat.
You can't disprove that.
Nobody here can disprove that.
But there's no evidence,
an experiment to protect you from my,
but we don't,
we don't have the data right now.
You don't have data supporting your hypothesis.
You're just dismissing on an on.
And can I get back to the and Elstein responding right now?
Let's let them respond to them on a Kevin Hall later.
Yeah.
So,
um,
what do you think about what he's saying about sugar and increased rates of
diabetes and that this is the cross?
Yeah,
I mean,
so let me put it this way.
We don't have any evidence supporting what he just said.
So that is a story that is not supported by evidence.
Now does it,
does that mean that it's definitely incorrect?
No,
I cannot say that.
That's definitely incorrect.
Same Way.
I can't say it's definitely incorrect that cosmic rays cause obesity.
But you know,
I,
I'm gonna,
I'm gonna use it.
Christopher Hitchens quote here that which is asserted without evidence does not
require evidence to refute.
And that's the way I feel about this particular story.
Um,
but you know,
there are cultures that consume large amounts of sugar and do not develop
obesity.
We've we've talked about yet and we're going to talk about it again right now.
Um,
so this is referenced number 21.
I'm on my blog.
I'm going to talk about three different cultures,
one of which we have not talked about Gary.
The first one is the uh,
the Hadza hunter gatherers of Tanzania.
This is a really interesting non industrial culture.
They as part of their hunter gatherer diet,
eat a lot of honey.
Honey is a very common food among hunter gatherers living similarly to how our
ancestors used to live.
And if you measured there year round honey intake,
it's about 15% of their calories.
So this is a major calorie source for them.
That's about as much sugar as the average American eats.
And they eat fruit sugar on top of this.
They use a lot of fruit on top of that.
And so they're even quite a bit of sugar.
And the Hadza men have about 12% body fat women have about 18.
So they correspond pretty closely to our western ideals.
What isn't that high for hunter gatherers?
No,
not really.
I mean that's higher than me.
Uh,
hang around blaming,
ask you this.
How have you had your body fatness measured?
Measured a bunch of ways.
Electricity of this machine where you hold onto these things,
stand on this platform and then most of it's done in physician's office of,
okay.
So,
um,
I've done it with calipers.
The Mo.
Okay.
So all the methods that you measure that you mentioned are not gold standard
methods.
So the gold standard methods are underwater weighing and the underwater weighing
these people on this island.
Ah,
actually I'm not sure.
I'm not sure how that they bring that equipment to this island.
Correct.
But okay,
look,
um,
I can tell you that you can look up photos.
I don't remember how they,
how they measured their body fat,
but you can look,
I am 12% as measured by Dexa.
So I'll just tell you that.
So you can get a sense of what 12% is by Dexa.
Um,
which is a gold standard method.
so you can look at photos of these people.
They're very fit.
They're lean,
they're not like ripped,
you know,
they're not Arnold Schwarzenegger and peak form,
but they are,
no,
I understand that.
But it seems to correlate with a higher consumption of sugar that they seem to
have a higher percentage of body fat than the average hunter gather.
Now if you look at a lot of the average hunter gatherers,
like a friend of mine does a lot of work with the pygmies in the Congo and
they've very lean.
Okay.
So see these packs and that's the second culture I was going to cite.
That eats a ton of honey.
Do they?
Yeah.
If they're the same ones than the booty pygmies in the Congo,
um,
they eat up to 80% of their calories can come from honey during the rainy
season.
So they also eat a lot of honey and Arlene not just leave the year.
Uh,
correct.
Yeah.
For them.
It's part of the year,
the Hadza that eat it more consistently and the Hadza have low levels of body
fat.
Their cardiovascular risk markers are excellent.
They don't have diabetes.
Same for,
but this is absolutely not like a controlled study in the consumption of food.
Not,
I absolutely agree with you.
That's exactly the point I'm trying to make is that when you have a culture that
is eating a lot of sugar,
but everything else is in place.
So doing everything else right,
the sugar is not enough to make them fat.
It's not single handedly enough.
I'm not saying it doesn't contribute.
I think sugar does contribute.
Just to be very clear.
I think sugar does contribute to obesity and diabetes and cardiovascular
disease,
but it's not single handedly responsible as Gary has argued.
So the third culture is pretty interesting.
The Kuna of Panama.
And the reason they're interesting is that they actually aren't eating honey.
They're actually eating white sugar.
So there are culture that um,
they live primarily a nonindustrial lifestyle.
They're farmers and hunter gatherers and um,
they,
but they do a little bit of trade.
And one of the things they trade for us sugar and they eat sugar sweetened foods
as well.
So like donuts and pastries and they drink soda and Koolaid.
What is their lifestyle in terms of like what do they have a natural lifestyle.
They are hunter gatherers and subsistence farmers.
So they're,
you know,
living a physically active natural lifestyle.
So this is the problem in comparison with any westernized civilization that you
burn off soul.
Many more cowers
100% agree with you.
And I think that is exactly the point I'm trying to make is that it's more
complicated than just sugar
and is more complicated than that than just sugar.
But with a normal lifestyle,
it may not be.
This is,
you know,
I the consumption,
the thing about burning of the calories is also the,
the,
the glucose demands of glycogen demands on the muscle.
You're,
you're,
you're not just existing like the,
one of the problems with Western lifestyle is that many people are just
existing.
They're sitting in a chair,
they're walking to a desk,
they're sitting in their car,
they're not doing anything to burn any of this shit off.
So even if you have,
like if you get a baseline of a minimal amount of cowers that you require for
the day,
I think what Gary's getting at is that if you,
if you have this lifestyle,
the lifestyle that many of us have,
and then with that lifestyle consume sugar that you're going to get fat.
I don't think you can compare that to athletes.
And in that respect,
I don't think you can compare that to a hunter gatherers because you're
requiring is a much more significant load on your body.
You like when I,
uh,
I did this sober October fitness challenge with my friends during October and
we,
I was working out four hours a day,
five and I was fucking eating everything that moved.
I was drinking soda.
I never drink soda.
I was eating cookies.
I didn't gain any weight other than muscle.
I didn't get any fat at all.
Yeah.
And I was eating a terrible fucking die,
but I was going crazy.
When you're trying to stay alive and you're running around plowing and growing
foods and hunting and gathering and fishing,
you're burning off insane amounts of calories.
Just the hiking that's required,
the amount of exercise it's required,
it's off the charts in comparison to standard Brett Western life.
We are on the same wavelength here.
I mean,
I completely agree with you that it is more complicated than just sugar and,
but if you read what Gary is written,
and please correct me if I'm wrong here,
Gary argues that sugar is the primary cause of obesity
and that physical activity does not matter.
Calorie intake does not matter if you think that physical activity doesn't
matter.
Uh,
I think it's a,
uh,
no,
I don't think it makes a hell of a lot of difference for fat occurred when we're
talking about the cause of obesity.
I don't believe obese people get obese because they're suddenly,
let me put it this way.
So if you take someone who's an elite athlete and they start consuming a lot of
sugar,
but they,
they ramp up their exercise accordingly.
Like say if someone does what I did during the sober October,
they're working out three,
four hours a day every day.
You don't think that they have higher sugar demands that their body would just
burn that off?
Absolutely.
I think that if there's a real benefit to exercise,
it's burning off the carbohydrates you consume
then and you need less insulin to do it.
Can I respond to the Cuna?
Get back to them for a second.
Okay.
I mean one of the issues I have was Stephan is he writes off my stories,
his stories,
which they are all science begins his stories on hypotheses and then what you do
is go look for the evidence and then he quotes studies and refers to it as
evidence is out.
This is somehow by calling it evidence that may end.
We had this discussion a year and a half ago and you didn't disagree with me at
the time and it had no influence,
so I'm just going to read from the email I wrote to second
reading emails.
It's gotten to that point in the conversation,
did it well,
because it's,
I'm not only going to read from an email five time,
I'm going to read from your book,
read the Cuna.
The study you cited is interesting.
Okay.
So this was a study that profess to measure sugar intake of this population on
an island on the Gandy and compare it to the population in Vera Cruz where they,
uh,
they had emigrated and I say,
but they're added sugar intake on,
on the Gandhi,
according to figure one is 25 teaspoons per week,
plus the equivalent of 24 ounces of Sodas at 78 grams.
If it's coke 32 ounces of Koolaid,
that's 96 grams.
I said I'm leaving out the cup of a sugar cane because I don't know what that
has meant or how they assess it one way or the other.
It's not processed sugar.
So it's roughly 274 grams of sugar per week or about 32 pounds per year.
Now,
that alone is very low intake and we don't know how it changed over the years.
We have no idea if it's increasing recently or been low for years.
So you just use the coon as an example of a population that needs a lot of sugar
and stated at dogmatically,
but that lot of sugars,
32 pounds a year.
And then I said,
wait,
hold on.
I thought you did.
That's what I heard.
Uh,
if we believe this study,
the coon in Vera Cruz are consuming roughly the same amount,
but I'm not sure.
I believe this study,
when it comes to the Vera Cruz population,
do you really think these urbanized coon are consuming only three,
eight ounce?
So this per week.
So the implication was as population of Caribbean islanders immigrates to Vera
Cruz,
they move into the city and they consume sugar back where they used to live
because they trade for it.
Then when they get into the city,
um,
so five glasses of Koolaid,
no candy,
no ice cream,
nothing.
I'd like to know more about the urban CUNA before I accept such an analysis is
valid on top of this.
As they say,
the analysis is done mostly of women because the women were available to study
because they were at home during the day on quote.
So what were the men consuming and what were the children consuming when they
weren't at home?
And was there something magical about this freak food frequency questionnaire
and these researchers that they captured it accurately.
So this is what science is.
You have studies,
you have evidence in.
The question always is you've got competing hypothesis.
Does this evidence really speak to the hypothesis?
And I'm one of my issues with Steven,
it's what provoked are our initial discord is that he's constantly citing
studies that don't actually either they only speak to one hypothesis like the
overfeeding study or they're poorly constructed in poorly done.
So even this hazed example with the honey is something we discussed in email
very kindly and we went back and forth and I said,
I don't actually think it's a reputation because the hypothesis I'm defending
here,
the case against sugar is you add sugar to any populations,
native diet,
and you get epidemics of obesity and diabetes.
So here's a population that's been eating honey for maybe thousands of years.
In fact,
when they emigrated to this area they made,
I've added honey to their diet and had obesity and diabetes then and Steven
points out in the book obesity and diabetes in a hunter gatherer populations,
a death sentence for the child and for the mother who gives birth.
So you're going to very quickly weed out anyone.
So again,
it just comes back to this question of does this actually does,
is it a refutation of the hypothesis that I found a hunter gatherer population
that eats a lot of honey and is in fat?
And the answer is,
I don't think so.
Stephen thinks it does.
You could flip a coin.
All of this can be settled with experiments.
One of the experiments we did at Noci,
uh,
so one of the metabolic problems that goes along with obesity and diabetes and
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease,
it's endemic to used to be 20 years ago,
if he had alcoholic fatty,
if he had fatty liver disease at Dr. Wood,
and you told the doctor he didn't smoke,
they would assume you were allying.
Now it's so common and so common in children and particularly common in Hispanic
children.
The uh,
that it's clear it's not caused by alcohol.
And the question is what causes it?
Cause if you could create a fatty liver with the macronutrient,
you could probably create insulin resistance as well.
And then this whole slew of disorders including obesity and diabetes.
So my non for profit funded a pilot study where we just took 40 kid by the
researchers at the UC San Diego and at Emory university in Atlanta,
took 40 kids who had nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and randomized them into
two groups in one group.
We gave them the entire family,
all the food they need it so they could overeat to their heart's extent,
but no added sugars in their diet.
No sugary beverages.
And this study was published in Jama four months ago and it's just,
it
get rid of the sugar in the Diet.
The fatty liver disease resolves,
you know,
it was pretty simple.
I could there tells you nothing about mechanism.
The kids lost a little bit of weight.
Maybe it was a weight loss.
The conventional wisdom would be they just ate less,
which I wouldn't be at all surprised because they probably didn't like the food
as much without sugar in it.
But these are the kinds of ways you could test these hypotheses and problems I
have with like the met analysis,
getting back to Kevin and hall,
there's two ways you could do science.
You could say,
let's look at all the junk that was done for 30 40 50 years.
Let's find everything we can.
That even vaguely speaks to the experiment and ignore any quality of the study.
So if it may be asked,
it asks this question like we want to know what happens when people do this,
but in doing this we switched there,
you know,
a fat intake around fat and carbon take around and then we can throw all that
garbage into a Meta analysis.
And the one thing,
I'm pretty competent if they did a poor job because the one study I looked up,
the one with the biggest effect,
they mistook kilojoules for kilocalories.
So they reported that 400 kilocalories decrease in energy expenditure on the low
fat diet.
One was a 400 kilo joule,
which is,
what's that factor?
You know,
these numbers,
uh,
0.8 0.18 or so.
Several of the other studies where Jim Hill Studies,
we've talked about Jim,
how the biggest studies who Jim Hill and the way we approach it,
the not for profit and say,
you've got to understand what the question is and you've got to design an
experiment to get the right answer.